---
category: syllabus
title: Syllabus
layout: syllabus
pdf: syllabus-psci-285.pdf
---

# Description

Both the media and much of political science scholarship portray domestic
politics as taking priority over international politics.  We often hear about
how politicians' domestic interests affect their decisions in the
international arena, but rarely the reverse.  This course flips the
traditional way of thinking about "domestic politics and international
relations" on its head.  We will spend the semester examining how
international politics affects domestic political leadership, policies,
cleavages, and even institutions.  The point is not to argue that
international factors trump all others---they do not---but instead to think
critically about how homegrown political phenomena may have roots abroad.

A broader goal of the course is to practice a scientific approach to the study
of politics.  We will be particularly interested in how scholars propose
hypotheses about the domestic-international relationship and how they use
empirical evidence to test these propositions.  There are few (if any)
universally accepted findings in this relatively young field of study.  In
fact, most of the readings focus on areas of disagreement in the
literature---all the better to observe the process of dialogue through which
scientific progress is made.

Because the readings are drawn mostly from the political science literature of
the past two decades, and the majority of such research uses quantitative
analysis in one form or another, you will inevitably run into some math.  But
don't panic!  This course does not require any math background, and you will
not be tested on quantitative concepts.  Even when we read material with a
quantitative component, our focus will be on theories, hypotheses, and
research design---not mathematical details.


# Grading

Your grade in PSCI 285 consists of the following components:

* **Short Papers (45%).** You will write three short papers (6--8 pages
  each).[^page-lengths]  You will select the topic of each paper from a set of
  prompts that will be handed out a week and a half before the paper is due.
  The first paper will be due September 26, the second October 24, and the
  third November 21.

* **Midterm Exam (20%).** An in-class midterm consisting of short essay
  questions will be held on October 3.  *If you cannot be present in class on
  October 3, please let me know as soon as possible so that we can make
  alternative arrangements.*

* **Final Exam (25%).** A final exam consisting of longer essay questions will
  be held on December 10 from 3:00 p.m.--5:00 p.m.

* **Participation (10%).** This class is a seminar, and your participation is
  crucial for its success.  I expect you not only to attend class, but also to
  have completed the readings and prepared to discuss them.  Your attendance,
  preparation, and engagement in class discussion will all be reflected in
  your participation grade.

[^page-lengths]: Page lengths quoted assume a double-spaced document with
    12-point text and 1-inch margins.


# Academic Integrity

As in all courses at Vanderbilt, your work in PSCI 285 is governed by the
Honor Code.  I encourage you to discuss course material and assignments with
your peers, but the written work you turn in must be solely your own.  You are
required to write and sign the Honor Pledge on all written assignments and
examinations: "I pledge on my honor that I have neither given nor received
unauthorized aid on this assignment."

I have no tolerance for plagiarism.  If you turn in plagiarized work, you will
receive a failing grade for the course and be reported to the Honor Council.
Plagiarism is not just verbatim copying and pasting---representing someone
else's ideas as your own without citing the source is also a form of
plagiarism.  Ignorance of what constitutes plagiarism is not an excuse or a
defense.  For more information about what is and is not plagiarism, refer to
[the Student Handbook section on the Honor System](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/student_handbook/the-honor-system/).
Always remember: *when in doubt, cite.*


# Additional Concerns

## Special Accommodations

If you need course accommodations due to a disability, if you have emergency
medical information to share with me, or if you need special arrangements in
case the building must be evacuated, please make an appointment with me or
with the
[Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Action, and Disability Services Department](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/ead/)
(2-4705) as soon as possible.

## Classroom Recording

The use of technologies for audio and video recording of lectures and other
classroom activities is allowed only with the express permission of the
instructor.  In cases where recordings are allowed, such content is restricted
to personal use only unless permission is expressly granted in writing by the
instructor and by other classroom participants, including other
students.  Personal use is defined as use by an individual student for the
purpose of studying or completing course assignments.  When students have
permission for personal use of recordings, they must still obtain written
permission from the instructor to share recordings with others.
 
For students registered with EAD and who have been approved for audio or video
recording of lectures and other classroom activities as a reasonable
accommodation, applicable federal law requires instructors to permit those
recordings.  Such recordings are also limited to personal use, except with
permission of the instructor and other students in the class.


# Books

The following books are required:

* Giacomo Chiozza and Hein Goemans,
  [*Leaders and International Conflict*](http://amzn.com/1107660734)
  (Cambridge University Press, 2011).

* Douglas M. Gibler,
  [*The Territorial Peace: Borders, State Development, and International Conflict*](http://amzn.com/1107437245)
  (Cambridge University Press, 2012).

* Ronald Rogowski,
  [*Commerce and Coalitions: How Trade Affects Domestic Political Alignments*](http://amzn.com/0691023301)
  (Princeton University Press, 1990).


# Schedule

## Introduction

### August 20--22: Levels of Analysis in International Relations

* J. David Singer,
  ["The Level-of-Analysis Problem in International Relations,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2009557)
  *World Politics* 14, no. 1 (1961): 77--92.

* Robert D. Putnam,
  ["Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-Level Games,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2706785)
  *International Organization* 42, no. 3 (1988): 427--460.

### August 25--29: From International to Domestic Politics

*No class Friday, August 29.*

* Andrew Moravcsik,
  ["Taking Preferences Seriously: A Liberal Theory of International Politics,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2703498)
  *International Organization* 51, no. 4 (1997): 513--553.

* Peter Gourevitch,
  ["The Second Image Reversed: The International Sources of Domestic Politics,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2706180)
  *International Organization* 32, no. 4 (1978): 881--912.

* Gabriel A. Almond,
  ["The International-National Connection,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/193715),
  *British Journal of Political Science* 19, no. 2 (1989): 237--259.


## International Impacts on Domestic Leadership

### September 1--5: Rally 'Round the Flag

* William D. Baker and John R. Oneal,
  ["Patriotism or Opinion Leadership? The Nature and Origins of the 'Rally 'Round the Flag' Effect,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3176318)
  *Journal of Conflict Resolution* 45, no. 5 (2001): 661--687.

* Matthew A. Baum,
  ["The Constituent Foundations of the Rally-Round-the-Flag Phenomenon,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3096071)
  *International Studies Quarterly* 46, no. 2 (2002): 263--298.

### September 8--12: War and Leaders --- Theory and Qualitative Evidence

* Giacomo Chiozza and Hein Goemans, *Leaders and International Conflict*,
  ch. 1, 2, 5.

* *Recommended:*
    * Arthur A. Stein,
      ["Conflict and Cohesion: A Review of the Literature,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/173431)
      *Journal of Conflict Resolution* 20, no. 1 (1976): 143--172.
    * Jane Kellett Cramer,
      ["'Just Cause' or Just Politics? U.S. Panama Invasion and Standardizing Qualitative Tests for Diversionary War,"](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0095327X05277899)
      *Armed Forces & Society* 32, no. 2 (2006): 178--201.

### September 15--19: War and Leaders --- Quantitative Evidence

*First short paper to be assigned Monday, September 15.*

* Chiozza and Goemans, *Leaders and International Conflict*, ch. 3, 4.

* *Recommended:*
    * Charles W. Ostrom, Jr. and Brian L. Job,
      ["The President and the Political Use of Force,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1958273)
      *American Political Science Review* 80, no. 2 (1986): 541--566.
    * Jack S. Levy, "The Diversionary Theory of War: A Critique," in *Handbook
      of War Studies*, ed. Manus I. Midlarsky (Boston: Unwin Hyman), ch. 11.
    * Bruce Bueno de Mesquita and Randolph M. Siverson,
      ["War and the Survival of Political Leaders: A Comparative Study of Regime Types and Political Accountability,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2082512)
      *American Political Science Review* 89, no. 4 (1995): 841--855.


## International Politics and Domestic Institutions

### September 22--26: Borders and Democratization

*First short paper due Friday, September 26.*

* Douglas M. Gibler, *The Territorial Peace*, entire book.

### September 29--October 1: Other International Influences on Democratization

* Nita Rudra,
  ["Globalization and the Strengthening of Democracy in the Developing World,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3647692)
  *American Journal of Political Science* 45, no. 4 (2005): 704--730.

* Helen V. Milner and Bumba Mukherjee,
  ["Democratization and Economic Globalization,"](http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.polisci.12.110507.114722)
  *Annual Review of Political Science* 12 (2009): 163--181.

* Jon C. Pevehouse,
  ["Democracy from the Outside-In? International Organizations and Democratization,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3078587)
  *International Organization* 56, no. 3 (2002): 515--549.

### October 3: Midterm Exam

### October 6--10: Colonial Legacy and Political Institutions

*No class Friday, October 10.*

* Kathryn Firmin-Sellers,
  ["Institutions, Context, and Outcomes: Explaining French and British Rule in West Africa,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/422366)
  *Comparative Politics* 32, no. 3 (2000): 253--272.

* Matthew K. Lange,
  *["British Colonial Legacies and Political Development,"](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2003.12.001)
  *World Development* 32, no. 6 (2004): 905--922.

* Ola Olsson,
  ["On the Democratic Legacy of Colonialism,"](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2009.08.004)
  *Journal of Comparative Economics* 37, no. 4 (2009): 534--551.

* *Recommended:*
    * Michael Bernhard, Christopher Reenock, and Timothy Nordstrom,
      ["The Legacy of Western Overseas Colonialism on Democratic Survival,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3693570)
      *International Studies Quarterly* 48, no. 1 (2004): 225--250.


## Outside Sources of Internal Cleavages

### October 13--15: Boundaries and Ethnic Conflict

*Second short paper to be assigned Monday, October 13.  No class Friday,
 October 17 due to fall break.*

* Daniel N. Posner,
  ["The Political Salience of Cultural Difference: Why Chewas and Tumbukas Are Allies in Zambia and Adversaries in Malawi,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/4145323)
  *American Political Science Review* 98, no. 4 (2004): 529--545.

* Edward Miguel,
  ["Tribe or Nation? Nation Building and Public Goods in Kenya versus Tanzania,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/25054263)
  *World Politics* 56, no. 3 (2004): 327--362.

* Elliott Green,
  ["On the Size and Shape of African States,"](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2478.2012.00723.x)
  *International Studies Quarterly* 56, no. 2 (2012): 229--244.

### October 20--24: Outside Causes of Civil War

*Second short paper due Friday, October 24.*

* Kristian Skrede Gleditsch,
  ["Transnational Dimensions of Civil War,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/27640512)
  *Journal of Peace Research* 44, no. 3 (2007): 293--309.

* Idean Salehyan and Kristian Skrede Gleditsch,
  ["Refugees and the Spread of Civil War,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3877896)
  *International Organization* 60, no. 2 (2006): 335--366.

* Stathis N. Kalyvas and Laia Balcells,
  ["International System and Technologies of Rebellion: How the End of the Cold War Shaped Internal Conflict,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/40863761)
  *American Political Science Review* 104, no. 3 (2010): 415--429.

### October 27--31: Outside Involvement in Civil War

* Patrick M. Regan,
  ["Third-Party Interventions and the Duration of Intrastate Conflicts,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3176239)
  *Journal of Conflict Resolution* 46, no. 1 (2002): 55--73.

* Dylan Balch-Lindsay and Andrew J. Enterline,
  ["Killing Time: The World Politics of Civil War Duration, 1820--1992,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3014035)
  *International Studies Quarterly* 44, no. 4 (2000): 615--642.

* Kristian Skrede Gleditsch and Kyle Beardsley,
  ["Nosy Neighbors: Third-Party Actors in Central American Conflicts,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3176214)
  48, no. 3 (2004): 379--402.


## The Global Economy and Domestic Politics

### November 3--7: Trade and Political Cleavages I

* Ronald Rogowski, *Commerce and Coalitions*, entire book.

* *Recommended:*
    * Wolfgang F. Stolper and Paul A. Samuelson,
      ["Protection and Real Wages,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2967638)
      *Review of Economic Studies* 9, no. 1 (1941): 58--73.

### November 10--14: Trade and Political Cleavages II

*Third short paper to be assigned Monday, November 10.*

* Paul Midford,
  ["International Trade and Domestic Politics: Improving on Rogowski's Model of Political Alignments,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2706938)
  *International Organization* 47, no. 4 (1993): 535--564.

* Michael J. Hiscox,
  ["Class versus Industry Cleavages: Inter-Industry Factor Mobility and the Politics of Trade,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3078596)
  *International Organization* 55, no. 1 (2001): 1--46.

* Michael J. Hiscox,
  ["Commerce, Coalitions, and Factor Mobility: Evidence from Congressional Votes on Trade Legislation,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3117932)
  *American Political Science Review* 96, no. 3 (2002): 593--608.

### November 17--21: Global Markets and the Welfare State

*Third short paper due Friday, November 21.*

* Geoffrey Garrett,
  ["Global Markets and National Politics: Collision Course or Virtuous Circle?"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2601358)
  *International Organization* 52, no. 4 (1998): 787--824.

* Layna Mosley,
  ["Room to Move: International Financial Markets and National Welfare States,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2601380)
  *International Organization* 54, no. 4 (2000): 737--773.

* Nita Rudra,
  ["Globalization and the Decline of the Welfare State in Less-Developed Countries,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3078610)
  *International Organization* 56, no. 2 (2002): 411--445.

* *Recommended:*
    * Karl Kaiser,
      ["Transnational Relations as a Threat to the Democratic Process,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2706065)
      *International Organization* 25, no. 3 (1971): 706--720.
    * Beth A. Simmons, Frank Dobbin, and Geoffrey Garrett,
      ["Introduction: The International Diffusion of Liberalism,"](http://www.jstor.org/stable/3877847)
      *International Organization* 60, no. 4 (2006): 781--810.

### December 1--3: Conclusions and Review

*The final exam will be held Wednesday, December 10 from 3:00 p.m.--5:00 p.m.*


